.. _background:

Background
----------

.. _meters-and-smart-meters:

1) Meters and Smart Meters - where does energy data come from?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Energy data is generated by hardware devices that measure electricity and
natural gas flow. A device like this is generally referred to as a
"meter" (though this is distinct from the software-based "EEmeter"
- see :ref:`methods-overview`). The most common and ubiquitous measuring
device is a utility-owned meter used for determining billing. Some utilities
have upgraded their meters to provide hourly or 15-minute interval
measurements. These so-called "smart meters" use Advanced Metering
Infrastructure (AMI) to transmit data back to utilities for processing in
near-real time. Other devices that generate energy data include sub-meters,
external sensors, and embedded sensors.

.. note::

    The "smart" in smart meter can be a bit of a misnomer. Despite higher
    measurement frequency and wireless data transmission, these smart meters
    collect essentially the same data that electricity meters did in the 1950s.
    Each meter datapoint consists of a timestamp and an incremental value of
    consumption. We call this  string of data characterized by paired sets of
    timestamps and meter readings a *trace*. Traces form the basis of the
    energy modeling in the EEmeter.

Just like the odometer in your car doesn’t tell you how fast you are
traveling, the meter on your house doesn’t tell you how much energy you have
consumed. Consumption must be calculated. In the past, energy companies simply
determined your rate of consumption by taking monthly meter readings and
calculating the difference. With smart meters, these datapoints can be
captured more frequently and with greater precision, allowing for more
sophisticated forms of billing.

2) Measuring Energy Savings and the Transition to Demand Side Management
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


The OpenEEmeter replaces traditional approaches to program-related energy
measurement. Utilizing newly available smart meter data, the OpenEEmeter
solves the problem of measuring energy savings and opens new doors for
managing demand side programs.

Historically, energy :ref:`savings <glossary-energy-savings>` have been
measured in one of three ways. The
first (and least costly) approach is to take laboratory measurements of
different energy-consuming devices (e.g., light bulbs) and calculate the
difference in consumption from one to the next, then estimate the savings over
a given period of time, taking into consideration typical usage patterns. This
first approach is limited by the accuracy and availability of physical models.

The second (and most costly) approach samples consumption data prior to and
following an intervention of some sort (e.g., an energy efficiency retrofit),
and estimates savings after controlling for building-specific factors like
occupancy, temperature, energy intensity, etc. This second approach is limited
by low availability of data describing these building-specific factors (thus
making it very costly).

A third (post-hoc) approach has recently emerged that takes a population-level
sample of similar buildings and compares with a treatment group of buildings
that have received an energy efficiency upgrade (or other intervention). This
approach assumes that all buildings will be affected equally by exogenous
factors, leaving only endogenous factors (i.e., the efficiency upgrade) to
account for the energy consumption difference.

In the analog era of traditional meters and monthly bills, efforts to improve
energy efficiency emphasized fairly static and permanent changes in
consumption. A whole-home retrofit, for example, would reduce energy demand
without requiring any additional behavioral or lifestyle changes. A one-time
intervention would provide years of benefit, and our metering technology at
the time provided a way to measure the performance of these measures.

With the introduction of smart meters, utilities have transitioned from simple
efficiency programs to a suite of programs under the umbrella of demand side
management (DSM). These new measures fall into three broad categories
including time of day, demand, and net metering. The OpenEEmeter expands the
programmatic interface of energy efficiency to engage with emergent
technologies and market based demand side engagement programs.

3) How the OpenEEmeter is valuable: Baselining, Normalization, and Modeling Energy Use
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Smart meter data allows for more complexity in statistical models. Rather than
relying on simple regression experiments to normalize energy consumption,
analysts can parse the impact of exogenous and endogenous factors
independently and iteratively. The notion of baseload energy use can even be
disaggregated into multiple demand states. For example, a home will use
very little energy when empty, a bit more when occupied, and a large amount
when appliances and heating or cooling systems are operating. These demand
states can be measured against various sorts of interventions, thus enabling
both traditional energy efficiency savings measurements, but also leveraging
modern load balancing tools.

The OpenEEmeter calculates energy savings in real time by selecting a sample
of consumption data prior to an intervention, weather-normalizing it to
establish a baseline, and calculating the difference between projected energy
usage and actual energy usage following the intervention. This method
maintains the cost-effectiveness of the naive predicted savings approach, the
real-world integrity of the building efficiency approach, without sacrificing
on time as with the post hoc control group approach.
